How does next actually work?
Might sound like a silly question.
It renders react on the server.
What is there to know about it?
Well, I found a lot of the questions that
I get about people building with T three
stack and with the tech we recommend here
come from fundamental misunderstandings of
how Next itself actually works and differs
from old ways of deploying things like
create react app or V single
page app deployments.
What makes next different.
How how should we think about it?
And how does data actually flow through
NextJS to your react application?
Let's talk about it.
This big old dump in the HTML here.
This is the content of what
gets serverside props returned.
Oh boy, am I happy you're here for this
stream and video because the whole point
of this is that SSR is
just the first step.
So NextJS, as we know, is a server
rendered framework for react.
The TLDR version is you write react code
and before it goes to the
users, it gets run on a server.
So the user gets a page that actually
has the content of the page.
If I go to somewhere like,
do I have a single, like a simple
VIT app deployed somewhere?
We did.
So this is an app that
was built using VIT.
Normally you put a query param for
the hours, minutes and seconds.
I'm lazy, don't feel like doing that.
The important detail to know here is that
the HTML that comes down the server
does not have the contents of the page.
So if I network tab and actually look at
the HTML we got back from the server,
you'll see that this HTML is like
hilariously empty, has a divid
root with nothing in it.
The reason for this is the content of the
page isn't created on a server,
it's created on the client.
This page is almost instructions
for how to make the website.
And most of those instructions
are contained within this index.
Whatever JS file.
This asset file is a bunch of JavaScript
that we bundled, that we built when
things were deployed on Versaille.
And this JavaScript gets loaded by the
client and then runs to create
the page that the user sees.
So the control flow here, if I open up
excalibra quick spa react flow is
I'll draw my arrow down
the top here is request.
The bottom is the HTML page.
I'm too lazy to draw those in here.
The step one is user
receives HTML with JS tag.
Should specify that this is like empty.
So the first steps, the user
receives empty HTML to JS tag.
User loads JS from JS tag, JS from or JS
runs, starts fetching
data and creating Page.
I'm going to have to make a
longer arrow for this one.
Eventually, data returns JS finishes
rendering Page, and then finally
complete Page with correct HTML.
In order to go from the user making a
request to this generated correct page,
we have to load JS here from the HTML.
So at this point we'll say
HTML here, but incorrect.
So at this point the HTML is
here, but it is incorrect.
It does not represent what
the page's content should be.
It represents a static cached asset of
just some of the content of the page.
And until all of these things happen, it
is not running or it is
not the correct page.
And it takes all the way to here to get
that correct page because the client has
to go do another server
trip to fetch data.
I could put a line actually for each point
that an additional request or
set of requests has to be made.
So request one happens at the top here and
then they receive the HTML,
then they request the JS here.
So this is the request
for that JavaScript.
And then once the JS comes in and runs, it
has to request the actual
data for the page contents.
So the first thing you
fetch here is the HTML.
First fetch HTML, then fetch JS, then
fetch the data you need for the page.
And finally, then after all of these
steps, you get a complete page
with the correct HTML out.
So each of these you request to the
server, you get HTML, you do some stuff,
you request the server again, you get some
JavaScript, you do some stuff, you
request the data, that comes back again.
And now you can actually
finish rendering the page.
But each of those steps, it's because the
server isn't generating HTML per request.
On this request.
The first one, the server doesn't know
what you want, it doesn't know
what the user is asking for.
It's just handing them an HTML page.
And from there the HTML page can load the
JavaScript, and then from that JavaScript
figure out what it's
actually meant to be doing.
But all of those steps have to occur on
the client's device before it
can render the correct page.
The goal of NextJS was to prevent this.
So if I go here and say NextJS
dataflow, what NextJS does?
And I'm going to delete all of these
lines, I'm just going to delete all of
this because most of the
info here is incorrect.
So user Requests Page so what happens
here when these request the page?
Depends on how you have things set up in
NextJS, but we'll assume you're
server rendering every page.
For now we'll go into what that means and
why you might not want
to do that in a minute.
But for now we'll say Next server.
We'll say Gets request runs
gets server side Props.
The Getserverside Props function is server
code that runs when a
user requests the page.
So if I request a page like, let's say I'm
requesting, I'll just change
it the User requests usertheo.
So user request usertheo Nextserver gets
the request and it runs the Getserverside
Props function that is in that page file
that gets server side props function
probably is taking a user ID from the
query param, in this case the slash theo.
It is running that against something like
a database to fetch some data and then it
returns that as props for that page
specifically so it can
render that into the HTML.
So your react code is
running here on the server.
So React runs on server using
properties from get serverside props.
This means that the actual page, the HTML
that has the information that you want the
HTML to have on it, is run
and generated on the server.
The server then sends correct HTML to user
based on what this react code rendered.
And then the user loads HTML, then loads
JS to catch up to what server rendered.
This catch up step is a
very important piece.
The catching up is how the
term for its hydration.
Because when your client isn't rendering
the whole page, it's just getting HTML
that's correct initially you
still want things to change.
Like in React, if I have a hook that
renders account and I want it to go up
every time a user clicks, but the server
rendered it as zero, I still want it to
increase when I click it on the user side.
The way that you do that is you take the
HTML that you got from the server and
you hydrate it with the JavaScript.
In order for the hydration to work, it
needs to know exactly what properties
were passed to generate that HTML.
Because effectively what it's doing when
you hydrate in React is it is regenerating
the same HTML in react so it knows, hey,
that element on the page matches this
virtual element in our virtual Dom so it
can do updates from that point forward.
This step, this hydration step takes
roughly as long as the painting step here
where you actually are generating and
running that code to figure out what you
need to fetch and then fetch it and
whatnot that takes just
as long to hydrate.
However, the page already exists and the
user already sees something and they're
probably reading the content of that page
as everything else was
updating behind the scenes.
And by the time they go to click
something, all of the JS is loaded
and hydrated the page properly.
But what about the server side props?
If you have server side props and these
return some data that is used to render
the page, how does the copy of that
rendering path that is running on
the client know about that data?
Well, here's where things
get a little hacky.
Do I have any pages that have get server
side props that I can quickly demo on?
I think ping does.
Cool.
So here's the ping call page for me.
And if I go in here and I actually go into
the HTML, I'll find a script tag somewhere
in here, actually be in the
head, maybe not Next data.
Here we are.
This here, this big old dump in the HTML
here, this is the content of what
gets serverside props returned.
This is dropped in the HTML
because it is necessary for the JavaScript
running on the client to know what was
used to render the page so it can properly
hydrate and synchronize the
client with the server.
This here is an important, arguably hack
that NextJS does in order to
make all of this possible.
So the magic piece here, the thing that
you might not have known about how NextJS
works, is that this page can only be
rendered on the client after the server
because the data needed to render this
page was included on the HTML itself.
So the main benefit here of Next
specifically is that the correct data is
on the page when it renders for the user
the first time, you don't have the blank
pop in that then shows
the correct content.
Like if I go to Twitch right
now, see this loading state?
That loading state is if I slow it on my
network, you can see it even more
exaggerated.
I'll put on Fast Three G and you'll see
there's a state here with
like a loading spinner.
Oh, wow.
It's a disable cache.
And knock that to slow.
You'll see that there's a state there
where the JS hasn't loaded yet
and it just has that top NAV.
Can I easily disable
JavaScript on the page?
Cool.